apps/README.md, before:


## Introduction

This is a list of companion applications for our paper, [*Opioid
prescribing patterns among medical providers in the United
States, 2003-17: retrospective, observational
study*](https://www.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.l6968). The full citation for
this paper is:

> Kiang MV, Humphreys K, Cullen MR, and Basu S. Opioid prescribing
> patterns among medical providers in the United States, 2003-17:
> retrospective, observational study. BMJ 2020;368:l6968. doi:
> [10.1136/bmj.l6968](https://www.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.l6968)

For interested readers, we have created several interactive results
viewers. These online applications allow readers to change the
parameters of plots ~~and tables~~ in order to view results for
different provider specialties, states, years, measures, drugs, or
sensitivity analyses. A brief description of each app is provided below.

**Update 1/11/20:** Due to limitations on our data use agreement, we
have removed tables from the public Shiny apps The tables are still
generated in the backend but are not displayed in the frontend. If you
are granted access to the restricted access data (through the process
outlined in the [main
README](https://github.com/mkiang/disproportionate_prescribing)) you can
display these tables in the Shiny applications by uncommenting out the
table section in each app’s `ui.R` file (usually after the plotting
functions).

The code for both our paper and these apps is available online in the
[official paper
respository](https://github.com/mkiang/disproportionate_prescribing).

## Interactive results viewers

1.  [**Prescribing patterns within a single
    year**](https://sanjaybasu.shinyapps.io/lorenz_curve_app/): This
    application is an interactive version of Figure 1 in our paper. For
    any specified year, it shows the cumulative proportion of drugs
    dispensed as a function of the cumulative proportion of ranked
    providers. That is, what proportion of the drug is prescribed by the
    top proportion of providers. It allows users to specify different
    sets of drugs, measures, states or provider specialty, and level of
    trimming (i.e., sensitivity analyses). Importantly, due to limits of
    the `shinyapps.io` server, this app only runs a subset of the drugs
    in our paper. To run it for *all* drugs, you must run the app
    locally.

<p align="center">

<img src="./../misc/lorenz_app_sample.png" width="50%" />

</p>

2.  [**Prescribing patterns over
    time**](https://sanjaybasu.shinyapps.io/prescribing_over_time_app/):
    This application is an interactive version of Figure 2 in our paper.
    It shows the proportion of different drugs prescribed by the top 1%,
    5%, 10%, 25%, or 50% of providers from 2003 to 2017. It allows users
    to specify different sets of drugs, measures, states or provider
    specialty, and level of trimming (i.e., sensitivity analyses).

<p align="center">

<img src="./../misc/top_centile_prescribing_sample.png" width="50%" />

</p>

3.  [**Closer look at the top
    centile**](https://sanjaybasu.shinyapps.io/top_centile_app/):
    This application allows for looking at the provider specialties in
    the top centile of prescribers and across all providers at different
    levels of trimming and different drug types (Fig. S5). In addition,
    it shows the centile to centile transactions of prescribing patterns
    for different years, drugs, and levels of trimming (Fig. 3).

<p align="center">

<img src="./../misc/top_centile_app_sample.png" width="50%" />

</p>

4.  [**Measures of global inequality in
    prescribing**](https://sanjaybasu.shinyapps.io/inequality_over_time_app/):
    This application is an interactive version of the Gini analysis in
    our paper (Supplemental Materials). We measured the disproportionate
    level of prescribing using several metrics of inequality. In our
    paper, we present the Gini coefficient and show that all measures of
    inequality are highly correlated. This app users to specify
    different sets of drugs, inequality metrics, measures, states or
    provider specialty, and level of trimming (i.e., sensitivity
    analyses).

<p align="center">

<img src="./../misc/ineq_app_sample.png" width="50%" />

</p>

5.  [**Prescribing of the top providers relative to the median
    providers**](https://sanjaybasu.shinyapps.io/ntile_relative_app/):
    This application is an interactive version of Supplemental Materials
    Fig. S6 in our paper. As described in the paper, we divided
    providers into centile groups (i.e., 100 equally-sized groups) and
    compared the prescribing patterns of the top 25 centile groups
    relative to the median (50th) centile group. It allows users to
    specify different sets of drugs, measures, states or provider
    specialty, and level of trimming (i.e., sensitivity analyses).

<p align="center">

<img src="./../misc/rel_prescribing_app_sample.png" width="50%" />

</p>

Commit message:

Migrated apps to personal shiny server

apps/README.md, after:


## Introduction

This is a list of companion applications for our paper, [*Opioid
prescribing patterns among medical providers in the United States,
2003-17: retrospective, observational
study*](https://www.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.l6968). The full citation for
this paper is:

> Kiang MV, Humphreys K, Cullen MR, and Basu S. Opioid prescribing
> patterns among medical providers in the United States, 2003-17:
> retrospective, observational study. BMJ 2020;368:l6968. doi:
> [10.1136/bmj.l6968](https://www.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.l6968)

For interested readers, we have created several interactive results
viewers. These online applications allow readers to change the
parameters of plots ~~and tables~~ in order to view results for
different provider specialties, states, years, measures, drugs, or
sensitivity analyses. A brief description of each app is provided below.

**Update 1/11/20:** Due to limitations on our data use agreement, we
have removed tables from the public Shiny apps The tables are still
generated in the backend but are not displayed in the frontend. If you
are granted access to the restricted access data (through the process
outlined in the [main
README](https://github.com/mkiang/disproportionate_prescribing)) you can
display these tables in the Shiny applications by uncommenting out the
table section in each app’s `ui.R` file (usually after the plotting
functions).

**Update 2/18/21:** Our shinyapps.io subscription has ended. Each app
has been migrated to my personal server, which has lower processing
power than the old servers. Results may take loner than before to
render.

The code for both our paper and these apps is available online in the
[official paper
respository](https://github.com/mkiang/disproportionate_prescribing).

## Interactive results viewers

1.  [**Prescribing patterns within a single
    year**](https://apps.mathewkiang.com/lorenz_curve_app_online/): This
    application is an interactive version of Figure 1 in our paper. For
    any specified year, it shows the cumulative proportion of drugs
    dispensed as a function of the cumulative proportion of ranked
    providers. That is, what proportion of the drug is prescribed by the
    top proportion of providers. It allows users to specify different
    sets of drugs, measures, states or provider specialty, and level of
    trimming (i.e., sensitivity analyses). Importantly, due to limits of
    the `shinyapps.io` server, this app only runs a subset of the drugs
    in our paper. To run it for *all* drugs, you must run the app
    locally.

<p align="center">
<img src="./../misc/lorenz_app_sample.png" width="50%" />
</p>

1.  [**Prescribing patterns over
    time**](https://apps.mathewkiang.com/prescribing_over_time_app/):
    This application is an interactive version of Figure 2 in our paper.
    It shows the proportion of different drugs prescribed by the top 1%,
    5%, 10%, 25%, or 50% of providers from 2003 to 2017. It allows users
    to specify different sets of drugs, measures, states or provider
    specialty, and level of trimming (i.e., sensitivity analyses).

<p align="center">
<img src="./../misc/top_centile_prescribing_sample.png" width="50%" />
</p>

1.  [**Closer look at the top
    centile**](https://apps.mathewkiang.com/inequality_over_time_app/):
    This application allows for looking at the provider specialties in
    the top centile of prescribers and across all providers at different
    levels of trimming and different drug types (Fig. S5). In addition,
    it shows the centile to centile transactions of prescribing patterns
    for different years, drugs, and levels of trimming (Fig. 3).

<p align="center">
<img src="./../misc/top_centile_app_sample.png" width="50%" />
</p>

1.  [**Measures of global inequality in
    prescribing**](https://apps.mathewkiang.com/top_centile_app/): This
    application is an interactive version of the Gini analysis in our
    paper (Supplemental Materials). We measured the disproportionate
    level of prescribing using several metrics of inequality. In our
    paper, we present the Gini coefficient and show that all measures of
    inequality are highly correlated. This app users to specify
    different sets of drugs, inequality metrics, measures, states or
    provider specialty, and level of trimming (i.e., sensitivity
    analyses).

<p align="center">
<img src="./../misc/ineq_app_sample.png" width="50%" />
</p>

1.  [**Prescribing of the top providers relative to the median
    providers**](https://apps.mathewkiang.com/ntile_relative_app/): This
    application is an interactive version of Supplemental Materials Fig.
    S6 in our paper. As described in the paper, we divided providers
    into centile groups (i.e., 100 equally-sized groups) and compared
    the prescribing patterns of the top 25 centile groups relative to
    the median (50th) centile group. It allows users to specify
    different sets of drugs, measures, states or provider specialty, and
    level of trimming (i.e., sensitivity analyses).

<p align="center">
<img src="./../misc/rel_prescribing_app_sample.png" width="50%" />
</p>
